Why to be needed circular queue to understand the
need for the circular
queue
First let us understand the limitation of the normal
Queue
Let us take a sample queue
Of size five
Let us
enqueue five elements 10 2030 40 50 After the
enqueue
Operations the queue will look something like this
Now let us dequeue
Three elements
So the first inserted elements 10 20 and 30 will
be removed from the queue and it will look like
this now suppose if we want to add one more
element
in the queue
What will happen Even though we have three empty spaces
we cannot enqueue element 60 because the rear pointer
is at the end of the queue
So this non usable empty space is the major limitations
of the normal queue
But we can eliminate this issue by using a circular
Queue in the circular queue
Instead of a normal increment we will perform circular increment
The circular increment is performed by modulo division with the
queue size
So whenever we reached the end of the queue to
rear pointer automatically come to the Start index and
we can utilise the available space effectively
So in this case if we want to enqueue
Element 60 it will be added here
And we can also add two more elements in the
available space
So this is how a circular queue effectively utilises non
usable memory
That's it and in this video we have learned the
need for a circular
queue
In the next videos we will learn how to perform
and implement enqueue and Deque operations on a circular
queue.